In the previous lecture, we covered
the adjacency list, a widely used
way of representing graphs. In addition to the
adjacency list, we have another way of doing so,
it's the one we will see in this lecture: the
adjacency matrix. The adjacency matrix is a
square matrix of size |V|x|V|, where matrix[i][j]
says if yes or no there is an edge from i to j,
1 if there's an edge from i to j, 0 otherwise.
For example if matrix[1][5] is 1, it means that
there is an edge from 1 to 5, and 0 means that
there isn't, quite simple to understand I think.
Here is an example, we can see that
matrix[1][5] is 1, so there's an edge
from 1 to 5 as you can see. But matrix[4][7] is 0,
then there's no edge from 4 to 7 as you can see.
For an undirected graph, edges are
bidirectional, so if matrix[i][j] is 1,
matrix[j][i] will also be 1, and if
matrix[i][j] is 0, matrix[j][i] is also 0.
This is why with undirected graphs,
we get a symmetric adjacency matrix.
And for weighted graphs, if there is an edge from
i to j, we put the weight in that cell, else we
put 0 or infinity, infinity is preferred in cases
where the weight can be 0, to avoid ambiguity.
Here is an example of a weighted graph and its
adjacency matrix, you can see that in cells where
there is an edge between the vertex of that row
and the vertex of that column, we don't just put
1, we put the weight. And when there isn't, we
can put infinity, to say that there is no edge.
For the implementation, we will use a matrix of
size |V|x|V|, an array of arrays, all having the
same size. At the beginning the matrix is empty,
we will add rows and columns either when we add a
vertex or when we initialize it by giving it a set
of vertices and a set of edges. First operation:
add vertex. To add a vertex, we have to add a new
row and a new column, to welcome the new vertex.
And here it depends on the implementation,
if the adjacency matrix is static,
we have to create a new one from scratch whose
the size is the size of the old matrix + 1,
and we copy values of the old matrix. And if
it's dynamic, like in what we did, we traverse
rows to add a new cell at the end of each one
of them, then we add a new row at the bottom.
In code, we traverse rows, we append a 0 to
each one of them to gradually create the column,
then we append a new row that has the
same size as the first one for example.
For removing a vertex, we need to remove
the row and the column of that vertex,
for example here if we want to remove vertex
2, we remove row and column 2. And to do so,
we swap row 2 with the last row, we pop to remove
the last row, and same logic for the column,
we swap it with the last column and we pop
from each row to remove the last column.
In code, we swap the row i with the last row, we
pop from the matrix to remove the last row. And
for the column, for each row, we swap the element
i with the last column, and we pop, that's it.
After the loop we will have removed
the column we wanted to remove.
Next operation, adding an edge. Adding an
edge in an adjacency matrix is really easy,
we just need to put 1 in the right cell. We want
to add an edge from the vertex u to the vertex v,
so we put 1 in the cell at row u at column v.
For example if we want to add an edge from vertex
2 to vertex 3, we put 1 in adj_matrix[2][3]. In
code, we just put 1 in adj_mat[u][v]. And if the
graph is undirected, we need to also add an edge
from v to u, so we also put 1 in adj_mat[v][u].
And for removing an edge, same logic
but we put 0 instead of 1, that's it.
And to check if there's an edge from u to v, we
just check the cell adj_mat[u][v], is equal to 1.
Next operation, traversing neighbors. Neighbors
of a vertex u are vertices v with which there is
an edge between u and v, and to find them, we
traverse the row u in the adjacency matrix and
check cells where there is a 1. For example in
this matrix, in the row 4, cells where there is
a 1 are 0, 1, and 5, so neighbors of the vertex 4
are 0, 1, and 5, as you can see in the graph. In
code, we traverse vertices v, and if adj_mat[u][v]
is 1, then v is a neighbor, we perform the action
we want, for example printing it here. Last
operation, building the adjacency matrix.
We have a set of vertices V and a set of edges
E, and we want to build the adjacency matrix.
We know that an adjacency matrix has a size of
|V|x|V|, one row and one column for each vertex.
This is why we create a matrix
of |V| rows and |V| columns.
Cells are initially at 0 because we didn't
add edges yet, we just created the vertices.
Next step, we traverse the edges to fill the
cells. For each edge, we have the source and the
destination, so we put 1 in the cell at row source
at column destination, it means that we have an
edge from source to destination. If the graph is
undirected, we also put 1 in the opposite cell,
we put 1 from destination to source, we
put 1 in adj_mat[destination][source].
Now we've seen how to implement an adjacency
matrix and different operations, but we missed
something important. To access vertex 3
in the adjacency matrix, we go to row 3,
but what if the vertex was a string for example,
how would it work in the adjacency matrix?
The answer is that to allow vertices to be
something other than integers from 0 to n-1,
indices, we need a hash table that stores each
vertex and the index of its row/column, to be able
to access it. For example here we have 6 vertices
A B C D E F, so we create a matrix of size 6x6.
Now we have 6 indexes 0 1 2 3 4 5, we can
for example decide to give index 0 to A,
index 1 to B, index 2 to C, index 3 to D, index
4 to E, and index 5 to F. By doing so, if we want
to access the row of the vertex C for example,
we check the map, we find 2, so we go to row 2.
Little example, to add an edge from A to
E, we check the index of A which is 0,
the index of E which is 4, and we put 1 in
the cell adj_mat[0][4], we fixed the problem.
Now we know about the adjacency list, the
adjacency matrix, but one question remains,
if we want to implement a graph,
what implementation should we choose?
To answer this question, we will
compare space usage and time complexity
of operations of each one of them, this
is what we will do in the next lecture!